---
title: My MIT Media Lab Statement of Objectives
author: manuel
layout: post
permalink: /2015/10/01/my-media-lab-statement-of-objectives/
categories:
  - Uncategorized
---

Even if the [MIT Media Lab](http://media.mit.edu) admission process is unique in many aspects, as most graduate programs they require an *Statement of Objectives*. Back in 2014, when I decided that I wanted to apply, I didn't anticipate that writing one was going so be *that* difficult; I went over dozens of revisions, begged my friends and family for feedback, checked my grammar, and back again.

I now count myself among the lucky ones that were admitted for the Media Arts and Sciences graduate program in 2014. Here, I'm sharing my attempt at sounding smart-but-not-cocky and correct-but-not-boring, hoping that it'll help those who are thinking of coming to study at this magical place.

---

One afternoon in 1987 my father came home after work with a present for
me: it was a Czerweny 1500, a cheap clone of the venerable Sinclair
ZX81. My friends at school played games on their powerful Commodore 64s
and MSXs, but my little computer —made in Argentina— would only let me
type *instructions*; I was fascinated by that. I have been a hacker
since then and have worked as a professional software developer for more
than 15 years.

I was born in the midst of Argentina’s last military dictatorship into a
politically involved family. With the return of democracy in 1983, my
parents went back to politics and civic activism. I was raised in
demonstrations and heated political arguments around the family table.
Such and upbringing led me to significant political involvement
throughout my high school and university years. As I have grown
professionally, I have been applying my practical software development
skills to civic problems in Argentina.

As one of the 2013 Knight-Mozilla OpenNews fellows, I had the the
fortune of visiting the Media Lab, specifically the Center for Civic
Media, twice in the past year. I am of course highly aware of the work
and projects pursued by the Lab, but it was through conversations with
its students that I fully realized its unique, pan-disciplinary approach
to problem solving and research. I could feel the atmosphere of creative
chaos that fuels the Lab. As I reflect on my recent visits, I suspect
that the lab would be a second home to me; my own life and professional
history are equally as diverse, protean, and a bit chaotic.

My projects focus on the intersection of media, politics, activism, data
visualization, and technology. I like to think that they share a common
thread: making data useful for people by building tools that can better
inform our decisions and foster meaningful discussions and actions. As
the market pushes computers towards becoming glorified television sets,
networks to be one-way content delivery channels, and data to serve the
needs of marketing departments and intelligence agencies, we need to
take back the vision of the true pioneers of personal computing, like
Alan Kay and Seymour Papert, who imagined and built computers as
tools for thought and action, and not as devices for mere consumption
and surveillance.

I believe that knowledge of the *res publica* and effective action in
the public sphere is no longer achievable without technology. No one yet
knows how the mechanisms and dynamics of the so-called *new civics* will
materialize, but the projects that have come out of Center for Civic
Media, MacroConnections, and Social Computing are offering the world a
glimpse of how these tools are going to impact our society. I want to
help shape the future of civic participation, data analysis, and
meaningful social interaction through technology, by doing what I do
best: designing and building tools.

My skills as a *tool maker*, curiosity, and willingness to learn allowed
me to be one of the first employees of Satellogic[^1], an Argentine
aerospace startup conceived in the Singularity University graduate
studies program. During my two-year tenure at the company, my portfolio
of work included designing and implementing simulations, writing
hardware drivers and developing ground support software for the
CUBEBUG-1 nanosatellite mission[^2], the first *cubesat* built in
Argentina, grant-funded by the Ministry of Science and Technology.

Throughout those two years working in Bariloche, a beautiful town in
Patagonia, I experienced the most intense personal, intellectual, and
professional growth of my life. The simulator that I created allowed the
team to more deeply understand the coverage patterns of the spacecraft’s
instruments. While working on the simulator, I grew my understanding of
optics and Kepler’s laws of motion. I needed to become proficient with real-time operating systems, as
I was tasked with writing the driver for the onboard communications
module. I’ve been a licensed radio amateur for almost 20 years, so I was
naturally brought into building the ground station and even climbed its
60 feet mast to install the antenna that I assembled. A nearby volcano
erupted[^3] while I was living in Bariloche and I broke my wrist the
first time I tried my luck at snowboarding down the edge-of-town slopes.
I also got married to Luisina, my beautiful wife, who is a very talented
documentary filmmaker and screenwriter.

The greatest achievement of the CUBEBUG-1 team was showing that is
possible to bring agility and the hacker spirit to the aerospace
industry. The satellite was designed, built, and successfully launched
in less than a year by a group of six people that had not worked in
aerospace before. The company is going strong: they’ve recently put a
more complex cubesat[^4] into low earth orbit.

It was only recently when I realized that I could apply my technical
skills to social issues as well. Around July 2010, the media in Bahía
Blanca, Argentina —where I was born— was reporting on several corruption
scandals within the local government. However, they weren’t tapping a
rich source of information made available by the city: a daily feed of
procurement data. I thought that was partly because it was not easy to
consume and interpret, so I set out to build *Gasto Público
Bahiense*[^5], a tool that scrapes the municipality’s website and
re-publishes that information in a way that is easier to use and
understand.

My personal project had an immediate impact on the local media and
political landscape. For instance, the local press started using it as a
source of information[^6], contractors used the site to check on their
competitors’ past bids, citizens were made more aware of their
government’s procurement decisions. By initiative of the opposition
party, the City Council declared it “of municipal interest”[^7] by a
majority vote. It was also featured by several national and
international news outlets[^8].

The executive branch of the city’s government didn’t acknowledge the
existence of *Gasto Público Bahiense* until one year after it was
launched, when they redesigned their site and put a CAPTCHA in front of
the section where the procurement data was published, thus making it
inaccessible to web crawlers and scrapers. What was deceitfully
justified by the city’s former secretary of finance as a “security and
accessibility measure”[^9], was a *political* decision: the government
didn’t want that data to be analyzed with tools other than theirs. This
measure backfired on them, as it brought more notoriety to my
project[^10]. Evgeny Morozov devoted a section of his latest book to
this case[^11], where he uses it to illustrate his views on the relative
importance of opening government databases. Personal Democracy Media’s
*TechPresident* recently reported on this and other projects that I
developed*.*[^12]

After an administration change last year, the government reversed their
position towards *Gasto Público Bahiense.* Responding to the people’s
newly acquired awareness of public information resources, the new mayor
created an *Innovation and Open Government* agency[^13], whose appointed
officer allowed us access to the procurement data feed through a
web-service and included GPB in their own data portal. We’re now
collaborating on an initiative to help smaller municipalities open their
budget and procurement data by using their own technology and my project
together.

This year, I was a speaker in the biggest Argentine TEDx event where I
gave a talk to an audience of 1,500 about the story, challenges, and
impact of *Gasto Público Bahiense* and other projects I developed during
the last few years.[^14]

My newfound interest in civic activism, public information, and
technology brought me to being selected as one of the 2013
Knight-Mozilla OpenNews fellows. I worked in the newsroom of the leading
Argentine daily *La Nación*, where I participated in journalistic
investigations, built interactive visualizations that were published
alongside major stories, and trained the newspaper’s design, data
journalism, and technology staffs in the use of tools like D3.js and
CartoDB.

I developed Tabula[^15], an open source tool for extracting tabular
information out of PDF files —a pervasive problem in data journalism—,
also during my OpenNews fellowship. After its initial release in April
2013, it garnered a lot of attention within the data journalism[^16] and
open data communities. It was instrumental in the building of
ProPublica’s Dollars for Docs[^17]. Both The New York Times and
ProPublica now support the development of Tabula by devoting staff time
to the project.

In the same spirit of *data liberation* —inspired by ProPublica’s Free
the Files[^18] and The Guardian’s MP’s Expenses[^19]— I’m building a
tool[^20] for creating crowdsourced document transcription efforts,
geared to the needs of media organizations and grassroots activism. La
Nación chose this tool to build its own crowdsourced transcription
platform, that will be launched at the beginning of 2014.

Hearing from people who have used the tools I’ve built, like the
*Chicago Public Schools Apples 2 Apples* collective who used Tabula for
building SchoolCuts.org[^21] and successfully used data to engage a
community, taught me that is possible to improve the people’s
understanding of their government and enable meaningful action. I want
to draw upon those lessons. I want to study how can we use budget,
spending, and procurement data for social change and civic activism.
Participatory budgeting processes, for instance, could benefit from
tools that would let citizens use that information to simulate budgeting
and spending scenarios, propose changes, and work together towards
reaching an agreement. I agree with Alan Kay in that the computer
revolution hasn’t happened yet, as we still haven’t reached the full
potential of personal computing for education, dynamic simulations of
complex phenomena, and as tools for “new powerful argumentation”[^22]. I
believe that his vision can be also applied to the public sphere, by
tackling the hard problem of the asymmetry of access to analytical
tools.

The concepts behind projects like Civic Media's *Action Path,
Promise Tracker,* and *Data Therapy* are in perfect synergy with how I
imagine the future mechanisms of civic participation. I fantasize about
a Latin American version of *Media Cloud* and how it could help make
sense of the very complex relationship between the press and current
Latin American governments[^23].

I’m inspired by MacroConnections’ *DataViva.info*, a project that set
new standards for government information repositories and showed how to
turn complex public data into knowledge that can be used by everyone.
I’ve shown *Immersion* to all of my friends, and witnessed how they
changed their minds about what electronic surveillance really means.

I hesitate to call myself a hacker; that is a title that is bestowed
upon by *other* hackers. But I do recognize in me the main
characteristic of the hacker mindset: I learn by building, I think by
doing.

My desire is to perpetually grow and be a better learner, builder,
thinker, and doer. The MIT Media Lab is the best place I can think of to
do that. I hope that you agree.


[^1]: [Satellogic.com](http://www.satellogic.com/)

[^2]: [*CUBEBUG-1*](http://1.cubebug.org/). Launched on April 2013. Its
    [on-board software was
    open-sourced](https://github.com/satellogic/canopus), an example
    [of my work can be seen in
    the communications module driver](https://github.com/satellogic/canopus/blob/master/src/lib/canopus/drivers/radio/lithium.c).


[^3]: [*2011 Puyehue-Cordón Caulle
    eruption*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2011_Puyehue-Cord%C3%B3n_Caulle_eruption)
    — Wikipedia. Retrieved 12/2/2013

[^4]: [*CUBEBUG-2*](http://2.cubebug.org/) — Launched on November 2013.

[^5]: **Gasto Público Bahiense**:
    [*http://gastopublicobahiense.org*](http://gastopublicobahiense.org)
    ([*source on Github*](http://github.com/jazzido/GPB))

[^6]: Early example: [*Story on advertisement expenditure by the city
    government*](http://www.sololocal.info/index.php/notas-de-usuarios/42-destacadas/1914-lo-que-factura-rex-publicidad-)
    on a local news site.

[^7]: [*Text of the
    declaration*](https://www.google.com/url?sa=p&q=https://www.google.com/accounts/ServiceLogin?service%3Dwise%26passive%3Dtrue%26go%3Dtrue%26continue%3Dhttps://docs.google.com/file/d/103hXOOIYAJb-MYVL3I8G0ZsI3HInQuGOh3Q_qOY6VngrKzNoNkjkmRZTRnPK/edit?hl%253Den%2526pref%253D2%2526pli%253D1)
    (in spanish)

[^8]: **Global Voices**: [*“Argentina: Hackathons and budget
    transparency in Bahía
    Blanca”*](http://globalvoicesonline.org/2011/02/28/argentina-hackathons-and-budget-transparency-in-bahia-blanca/)

[^9]: [*TV Interview with the former Secretary of
    Finance*](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w75JkBS4tfE) about this
    matter (in spanish) — July 6th, 2011

[^10]: Articles in major argentine newspapers: [*La
    Nacion*](http://www.lanacion.com.ar/1387132-impiden-al-acceso-a-informacion-publica-en-bahia-blanca),
    [*Perfil*](http://www.perfil.com/contenidos/2011/11/17/noticia_0030.html)
    (in spanish)

[^11]: Morozov, E. [*Bad for the databases, good for
    democracy?*](http://books.google.com.ar/books?id=fdggBahA1qsC&lpg=PT78&dq=evgeny%20morozov%20bahia%20blanca&pg=PT76#v=onepage&q=evgeny%20morozov%20bahia%20blanca&f=false).
    In *To Save Everything Click Here.*

[^12]: Chao, R. [*Buenos Aires, A Pocket of Civic Innovation in
    Argentina —
    TechPresident*](http://techpresident.com/news/wegov/24601/buenos-aires-pocket-civic-innovation-argentina)

[^13]: [*Secretaría de Innovación y Gobierno Abierto — Bahía
    Blanca*](http://gabierto.bahiablanca.gov.ar/) (in spanish)

[^14]: **TEDx Rio de La Plata**: [*Cambiando el mundo de a una línea de
    código por vez*](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bSBh6Cm2Hpg)
    (Video - spanish)

[^15]: [***Tabula***](http://tabula.nerdpower.org) — Released under the
    MIT license ([*source on github*](http://github.com/jazzido/tabula))

[^16]: Weiss, J. [*How news organizations are using Tabula for data
    journalism.
    *](http://ijnet.org/stories/how-news-organizations-are-using-tabula-liberate-data-trapped-pdf-documents)

[^17]: [Dollars for Docs](http://projects.propublica.org/docdollars/) - ProPublica

[^18]: [Free The Files](http://www.propublica.org/series/free-the-files) - ProPublica

[^19]: [MP’s Expenses](http://www.theguardian.com/politics/mps-expenses) - The Guardian

[^20]: **CrowData** — Released under the MIT license ([*source on
    github*](http://github.com/jazzido/crowdata))

[^21]: [*SchoolCuts.org*](http://schoolcuts.org) *“created to share
    information about the 129 schools under consideration for closing.”*

[^22]: [*Viewpoints Research Institute memo
    M-2007-007-a*](http://www.vpri.org/pdf/m2007007a_revolution.pdf) —
    Retrieved 12/1/2013

[^23]: Goñi, U. [*“Argentina’s media empire Clarín told to sell off
    holdings by supreme court — The
    Guardian”*](http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/29/argentina-media-clarin-sell-holdings-supreme-court)
    — Retrieved 5/12/2013
